# Sitegeist.SchemeOnYou

Build APIs with autogenerated OpenApi-Specs by using scalar Types, Data Transfer Objects and Collections.

### Authors & Sponsors

* Bernhard Schmitt - schmitt@sitegeist.de
* Martin Ficzel - ficzel@sitegeist.de

*The development and the public-releases of this package is generously sponsored
by our employer http://www.sitegeist.de.*

## Build APIs 

### Configure OpenAPI Documents

The package allows to specify multiple OpenApi documents. Each class that extends `\Sitegeist\SchemeOnYou\Application\OpenApiController`
and matches one of the configured `classNames` patterns will be included into the api document.

```yaml
Sitegeist:
  SchemeOnYou:
    documents:
      example:
        name: "Example OpenApi document"
        classNames:
          - 'Vendor\Example\Controller\*'
```

The configured OpenApi Documents spec can than be rendered via cli `./flow openapidocument:render {name}`
or via url-path `/openapi/document/{name}`.

### Create OpenApi Controllers 

OpenApi endpoints that are included in the generated documents are all `*Action` methods inside controllers that
extends the `Sitegeist\SchemeOnYou\Application\OpenApiController` and are reachable via Routing. 
Controllers must specify the type of each parameter and also the return type. 

_!!! For now union-types are only allowed in return values of Action methods. !!!_


```php
<?php
declare(strict_types=1);
namespace Vendor\Example\Controller;

use Neos\Flow\Annotations as Flow;
use Sitegeist\SchemeOnYou\Application\OpenApiController;
use Vendor\Example\Dto;

class ExampleOpenApiController extends OpenApiController
{
    public function indexAction(Query $query, string $language = 'de'): Dto\AddressCollection|Dto\NotFoundResponse {
        ... 
    }
}
```

### PHP-Attributes

The following PHP Attributes allow to specify the details of the parameter and schema handling.

- ControllerAction Parameters
  - `\Sitegeist\SchemeOnYou\Domain\Metadata\RequestBody` a single method parameter can be marked a being the request body
  - `\Sitegeist\SchemeOnYou\Domain\Metadata\Parameter` all other parameters can be marked as beeing transferred via `query`, `path`, `header` or `cookie`. If a parameter has no attributes it is handled as `query` parameter. 
- DTO Classes 
  - `\Sitegeist\SchemeOnYou\Domain\Metadata\Response` the response Attribute allows to mark a dto with a status-code other than 200.
  - `\Sitegeist\SchemeOnYou\Domain\Metadata\Schema` the schema Attribute specifies a name and description for a DTO if that is not to be derived from the PHP name.



## Supported Types

The following property types are supported by this package. You will notice the absence of arrays here but Data-Transfer-Objects (DTO)
and Collections which allow much finer control about property conversion.

### Scalar Values

Values of type `string`, `int`, `float`, and `bool` are allowed directly by OpenApi and need no transformation.

_!!! `null` is not allowed as a single type. However, nullable values are allowed !!!_

### PHP Date Objects

Objects of type `\DateTime`, `\DateTimeImmutable`, `\DateInterval` are allowed as exceptions. 
The values are serialized as string with a predefined.

### Backed Enums

Value backed enums are supported by converting to and from the underlying value.

### Data Transfer Objects (DTO)

A supported transfer object has to adhere to the following rules:
- The class is `readonly`
- The class has a public constructor
- All parameters in the constructor are `public`, `promoted` and of a supported type
- The number of properties equals the number of constructor arguments

```php
#[Flow\Proxy(false)]
final readonly class Address
{
    public function __construct(
        public string $streetAddress,
        public ?string $addressRegion,
        public ?string $addressCountry = 'DE',
        public ?string $postOfficeBoxNumber = null
    ) {
    }
}
```

If the DTO has a single property of name `value` it is serialized as that single value. 
In all other cases the DTO is serialized as an array of all constructor properties.


```php
#[Flow\Proxy(false)]
final readonly class Identifier
{
    public function __construct(
        public string $value,
    ) {
    }
}
```

#### Collection Objects

A supported collection object has to adhere to the following rules:
- The class is `readonly`
- The class has a public constructor
- The constructor has a single variadic parameter of a supported type 
- The class has a single `public`, `readonly` property

```php
#[Flow\Proxy(false)]
final readonly class AddressCollection
{
    /**
     * @var Holiday[]
     */
    public array $items;

    public function __construct(Address ...$items)
    {
        $this->items = array_values($items);
    }
}
```

_!!! There is a small chance the arguments passed to the constructor are not stored in the class property. We have to accept that until variadic arguments can be promoted. !!!_
  
## Installation

Sitegeist.SchemeOnYou is available via packagist. Run `composer require sitegeist/scemeonyou` to require this package.

We use semantic-versioning so every breaking change will increase the major-version number.

## Contribution

We will gladly accept contributions. Please send us pull requests.
